PROJECT_STATUS.md, before:

# HNF1B-DB API Project Status

## Current Architecture

The HNF1B-DB API has been fully migrated to use GA4GH Phenopackets v2 standard for data storage and exchange.

### Database
- **Database Name**: `hnf1b_phenopackets`
- **Type**: PostgreSQL with JSONB storage for phenopackets
- **Connection**: `postgresql+asyncpg://hnf1b_user:hnf1b_pass@localhost:5433/hnf1b_phenopackets`

### Data Migration System

**Direct Google Sheets → Phenopackets Migration**
```bash
make phenopackets-migrate       # Full migration
make phenopackets-migrate-test  # Test with 20 individuals
make phenopackets-migrate-dry   # Dry run with JSON output
```
- Script: `/migration/direct_sheets_to_phenopackets.py`
- Directly converts Google Sheets data to GA4GH Phenopackets v2
- No intermediate normalization required
- Proper HPO term mappings and variant prioritization (Varsome format preferred)

### API Endpoints

The API is fully phenopackets v2 compliant:

- **Base URL**: `/api/v2/`
- **Documentation**: `/api/v2/docs` (Swagger UI)
- **Main Endpoints**:
  - `/api/v2/phenopackets/` - CRUD operations for phenopackets
  - `/api/v2/phenopackets/search` - Advanced search
  - `/api/v2/phenopackets/aggregate/*` - Aggregations
  - `/api/v2/clinical/*` - Clinical feature queries

### Key Files

#### Migration System
- `/migration/direct_sheets_to_phenopackets.py` - Direct migration script
- `/PHENOPACKETS_DATA_MAPPING.md` - Complete data mapping documentation
- `/PHENOPACKETS_MIGRATION_GUIDE.md` - Migration guide and instructions

#### API System
- `/app/main.py` - FastAPI application entry point
- `/app/phenopackets/` - Phenopackets endpoints and models
- `/app/auth_endpoints.py` - JWT authentication

### Data Mappings

Key mapping decisions:
- `individual_id` → `subject.id` (primary identifier)
- `IndividualIdentifier` → `subject.alternateIds`
- `AgeReported` → `timeAtLastEncounter`
- `AgeOnset` → `disease.onset`
- Varsome column prioritized for variant data (GA4GH compliant)

HPO Terms (updated for accuracy):
- Mental Disease → HP:0000708 (Behavioral abnormality)
- Brain Abnormality → HP:0012443 (Abnormality of brain morphology)
- Abnormal Liver Physiology → HP:0031865 (Abnormal liver physiology)

### Development Commands

```bash
# Start services
make hybrid-up     # Start PostgreSQL + Redis
make server        # Start API server

# Migration
make phenopackets-migrate-dry  # Test migration with JSON output
make phenopackets-migrate       # Run full migration

# Code quality
make format        # Format code with ruff
make lint          # Run linting
make check         # Run all checks

# Stop services
make hybrid-down   # Stop containers
```

### Removed Files

The following deprecated/outdated files have been removed:
- `migrate_from_sheets.py` - Old MongoDB migration script
- `deprecated_backup/` - Legacy backup directory
- `phenopackets_migration.py` - Old two-step migration (removed, replaced by direct migration)
- `run_phenopackets_migration.sh` - Old migration runner (removed)
- Various `.md` files for old refactoring plans
- Redundant `.env` files

### Current Status

✅ **Completed**:
- Full phenopackets v2 data model implementation
- Direct Google Sheets to Phenopackets migration
- API endpoints using phenopackets structure
- JWT authentication system
- Comprehensive data mapping documentation

⚠️ **Considerations**:
- Test suite needs implementation
- Performance testing with large datasets pending
- Production deployment configuration needed

The system is fully functional and ready for development/testing use with the phenopackets standard.

Commit message:

docs: document GA4GH VRS 2.0 variant digest implementation
  - Add VRS integration section to data mapping documentation
  - Update project status with VRS compliance achievement
  - Document VRS digest computation in CLAUDE.md and README
  - Clarify that variants now use proper GA4GH identifiers

PROJECT_STATUS.md, after:

# HNF1B-DB API Project Status

## Current Architecture

The HNF1B-DB API has been fully migrated to use GA4GH Phenopackets v2 standard for data storage and exchange.

### Database
- **Database Name**: `hnf1b_phenopackets`
- **Type**: PostgreSQL with JSONB storage for phenopackets
- **Connection**: `postgresql+asyncpg://hnf1b_user:hnf1b_pass@localhost:5433/hnf1b_phenopackets`

### Data Migration System

**Direct Google Sheets → Phenopackets Migration**
```bash
make phenopackets-migrate       # Full migration
make phenopackets-migrate-test  # Test with 20 individuals
make phenopackets-migrate-dry   # Dry run with JSON output
```
- Script: `/migration/direct_sheets_to_phenopackets.py`
- Directly converts Google Sheets data to GA4GH Phenopackets v2
- No intermediate normalization required
- Proper HPO term mappings and variant prioritization (Varsome format preferred)

### API Endpoints

The API is fully phenopackets v2 compliant:

- **Base URL**: `/api/v2/`
- **Documentation**: `/api/v2/docs` (Swagger UI)
- **Main Endpoints**:
  - `/api/v2/phenopackets/` - CRUD operations for phenopackets
  - `/api/v2/phenopackets/search` - Advanced search
  - `/api/v2/phenopackets/aggregate/*` - Aggregations
  - `/api/v2/clinical/*` - Clinical feature queries

### Key Files

#### Migration System
- `/migration/direct_sheets_to_phenopackets.py` - Direct migration script
- `/PHENOPACKETS_DATA_MAPPING.md` - Complete data mapping documentation
- `/PHENOPACKETS_MIGRATION_GUIDE.md` - Migration guide and instructions

#### API System
- `/app/main.py` - FastAPI application entry point
- `/app/phenopackets/` - Phenopackets endpoints and models
- `/app/auth_endpoints.py` - JWT authentication

### Data Mappings

Key mapping decisions:
- `individual_id` → `subject.id` (primary identifier)
- `IndividualIdentifier` → `subject.alternateIds`
- `AgeReported` → `timeAtLastEncounter`
- `AgeOnset` → `disease.onset`
- Varsome column prioritized for variant data (GA4GH compliant)
- **NEW**: GA4GH VRS 2.0 compliant variant identifiers with proper digests

HPO Terms (updated for accuracy):
- Mental Disease → HP:0000708 (Behavioral abnormality)
- Brain Abnormality → HP:0012443 (Abnormality of brain morphology)
- Abnormal Liver Physiology → HP:0031865 (Abnormal liver physiology)

### Development Commands

```bash
# Start services
make hybrid-up     # Start PostgreSQL + Redis
make server        # Start API server

# Migration
make phenopackets-migrate-dry  # Test migration with JSON output
make phenopackets-migrate       # Run full migration

# Code quality
make format        # Format code with ruff
make lint          # Run linting
make check         # Run all checks

# Stop services
make hybrid-down   # Stop containers
```

### Removed Files

The following deprecated/outdated files have been removed:
- `migrate_from_sheets.py` - Old MongoDB migration script
- `deprecated_backup/` - Legacy backup directory
- `phenopackets_migration.py` - Old two-step migration (removed, replaced by direct migration)
- `run_phenopackets_migration.sh` - Old migration runner (removed)
- Various `.md` files for old refactoring plans
- Redundant `.env` files

### Current Status

✅ **Completed**:
- Full phenopackets v2 data model implementation
- Direct Google Sheets to Phenopackets migration
- GA4GH VRS 2.0 compliant variant representation with proper digests
- API endpoints using phenopackets structure
- JWT authentication system
- Comprehensive data mapping documentation

⚠️ **Considerations**:
- Test suite needs implementation
- Performance testing with large datasets pending
- Production deployment configuration needed

The system is fully functional and ready for development/testing use with the phenopackets standard.
