README.md, before:

# HNF1B-API

A FastAPI-based REST API for managing clinical and genetic data for individuals with HNF1B disease.

## Quick Start

**Prerequisites:** Python 3.10+, Docker, uv package manager ([install guide](#1-install-uv-package-manager))

```bash
# 1. Install dependencies
make dev

# 2. Configure environment  
cp .env.example .env
# Edit .env with your database settings

# 3. Start services and database
make hybrid-up      # Start PostgreSQL and Redis containers
make db-upgrade     # Apply database schema

# 4. Start development server
make server

# API available at http://localhost:8000
# Docs at http://localhost:8000/docs
```

## Development Commands

```bash
make help          # Show all available commands
make check         # Run all checks (lint + typecheck + tests)
make test          # Run tests
make format        # Format code with ruff
make lint          # Lint code with ruff
make typecheck     # Type check with mypy
make hybrid-down   # Stop containers
```

## Tech Stack

- **API**: FastAPI with async/await
- **Database**: PostgreSQL with SQLAlchemy
- **Cache**: Redis
- **Auth**: JWT tokens
- **Tools**: uv (dependencies), ruff (linting/formatting), mypy (types)
- **Development**: Docker containers for services

## API Endpoints

### Phenopackets v2 API (Current)
- `/api/v2/phenopackets` - GA4GH Phenopackets CRUD operations
- `/api/v2/clinical` - Clinical feature-specific queries
- `/api/v2/auth` - JWT authentication
- `/api/v2/hpo` - HPO term search and validation
- `/api/v2/docs` - Interactive API documentation

### Legacy Endpoints (Being phased out)
- `/api/individuals` - Patient demographics
- `/api/variants` - Genetic variants
- `/api/publications` - Publication metadata
- `/api/search` - Cross-collection search
- `/api/aggregations` - Data statistics

## Environment Setup

Create `.env` file:
```
DATABASE_URL=postgresql+asyncpg://hnf1b_user:hnf1b_pass@localhost:5433/hnf1b_db
JWT_SECRET=your-secret-key
```

## Data Import

The project includes a direct Google Sheets to GA4GH Phenopackets v2 migration system that imports clinical and genetic data directly into the international standard format.

### Prerequisites

```bash
# 1. Start database services
make hybrid-up     # Start PostgreSQL and Redis containers

# 2. Verify environment
# Ensure .env file exists with valid DATABASE_URL pointing to hnf1b_phenopackets database
```

### Import Commands

```bash
# Full production import (processes all 864 individuals)
make phenopackets-migrate

# Limited test import (processes 20 individuals, faster for development)
make phenopackets-migrate-test

# Dry run - outputs to JSON file without database changes
make phenopackets-migrate-dry

# Alternative: Run directly with Python
uv run python migration/direct_sheets_to_phenopackets.py          # Full import
uv run python migration/direct_sheets_to_phenopackets.py --test   # Test import
uv run python migration/direct_sheets_to_phenopackets.py --dry-run # Dry run
```

### Data Sources

The migration system processes data from multiple sources:

1. **Google Sheets**: Clinical and genetic data from configured spreadsheet
   - User/reviewer information
   - Publication metadata with PubMed enrichment
   - Individual demographics and clinical reports
   - Variant classifications and annotations

2. **Genomic Files** (in `/data/` directory):
   - `HNF1B_all_small.vcf` - Small genetic variants (182 variants)
   - `HNF1B_all_large.vcf` - Large structural variants (19 variants)  
   - `HNF1B_all_small.vep.txt` - VEP annotations for small variants (303 annotations)
   - `HNF1B_all_large.vep.txt` - VEP annotations for large variants (53,855 annotations)
   - `GRCh38-v1.6_*.tsv.gz` - CADD pathogenicity scores

### Migration System Architecture

The direct migration system is located in `/migration/` directory:

```
migration/
├── direct_sheets_to_phenopackets.py  # Direct Google Sheets to Phenopackets v2 migration
└── (legacy modules - no longer used)
```

### Features

- **Direct conversion**: Google Sheets data directly to GA4GH Phenopackets v2 format
- **Deduplication**: Automatically consolidates multiple rows per individual
- **Test mode**: Processes limited dataset (20 individuals) for faster development
- **Dry run mode**: Outputs to JSON file for inspection without database changes
- **HPO mapping**: Automatic mapping of clinical terms to Human Phenotype Ontology
- **MONDO diseases**: Proper disease classification using MONDO ontology
- **Variant handling**: Prioritizes Varsome format, falls back to other formats

### Import Process

The direct migration:

1. **Loads Google Sheets data**: Fetches clinical and genetic data
2. **Groups by individual**: Consolidates 939 rows into 864 unique individuals
3. **Builds Phenopackets**: Creates GA4GH v2 compliant phenopackets
4. **Maps ontologies**: HPO terms for phenotypes, MONDO for diseases
5. **Stores in database**: Saves as JSONB documents in PostgreSQL

### Typical Output

```
Loading data from Google Sheets...
Loaded 939 rows for 864 unique individuals
Processing 864 individuals...
Building phenopackets: 100%|████████████| 864/864 [00:15<00:00, 55.23it/s]
Built 864 phenopackets

Storing phenopackets: 100%|████████████| 864/864 [00:30<00:00, 28.80it/s]
Successfully stored 864 phenopackets

Migration Summary:
- Total phenopackets: 864
- With phenotypic features: 828 (95.8%)
- With genetic variants: 864 (100.0%)
- Average features per phenopacket: 3.8

Migration completed successfully!
```

## Installation & Setup

### Prerequisites

- **Python 3.10+** (required for modern type hints)
- **Docker & Docker Compose** (for PostgreSQL/Redis services)
- **uv package manager** (for dependency management)

### 1. Install uv Package Manager

**macOS/Linux:**
```bash
curl -LsSf https://astral.sh/uv/install.sh | sh
```

**Windows:**
```bash
powershell -c "irm https://astral.sh/uv/install.ps1 | iex"
```

**Alternative (with pip):**
```bash
pip install uv
```

### 2. Clone and Setup Project

```bash
# Clone repository
git clone <repository-url>
cd hnf1b-api

# Install all dependencies (including dev and test groups)
make dev
# OR manually:
uv sync --group dev --group test

# Create environment file
cp .env.example .env
# Edit .env with your settings (see Environment Configuration below)
```

### 3. Environment Configuration

Create/edit `.env` file with required variables:

```bash
# PostgreSQL Database (matches docker-compose.services.yml)
DATABASE_URL=postgresql+asyncpg://hnf1b_user:hnf1b_pass@localhost:5433/hnf1b_db

# JWT Authentication
JWT_SECRET=your-secret-key-change-this-in-production

# Development Settings
DEBUG=true
```

### 4. Start Services & Database

```bash
# Start PostgreSQL and Redis containers
make hybrid-up

# Apply database schema
make db-upgrade

# Verify services are running
docker ps
```

### 5. Run the Application

```bash
# Start development server
make server

# API will be available at:
# - http://localhost:8000 (API)  
# - http://localhost:8000/docs (API documentation)
```

## Alternative Installation (without uv)

If you prefer using pip/virtualenv:

```bash
# Create virtual environment
python -m venv .venv

# Activate (Linux/macOS)
source .venv/bin/activate
# Activate (Windows)  
.venv\Scripts\activate

# Install dependencies
pip install -r requirements-dev.txt  # Includes dev and test dependencies

# Follow steps 3-5 above, but replace 'make' commands:
python -m uvicorn app.main:app --reload  # instead of 'make server'
python migration/direct_sheets_to_phenopackets.py --test  # instead of 'make phenopackets-migrate-test'
```

### Dependency Files Available

- `requirements.txt` - Core runtime dependencies only
- `requirements-dev.txt` - All dependencies including dev tools and tests
- `pyproject.toml` - Modern Python project configuration (preferred with uv)

## Troubleshooting

### uv Issues
- **"uv not found"**: Ensure uv is in your PATH, restart terminal
- **Permission errors**: On Linux/macOS, ensure `~/.local/bin` is in PATH
- **Python version**: uv requires Python 3.8+, project needs 3.10+

### Database Issues  
- **Connection refused**: Ensure `make hybrid-up` completed successfully
- **Schema errors**: Run `make db-upgrade` to apply migrations
- **Port conflicts**: Check if port 5433 is available (`lsof -i :5433`)

### Docker Issues
- **Services won't start**: Check Docker is running and ports 5433, 6379 available
- **Permission errors**: Ensure user is in docker group (Linux)

### Alternative Database Setup
If Docker isn't available, install PostgreSQL locally:

```bash
# Update DATABASE_URL in .env to match your local setup
DATABASE_URL=postgresql+asyncpg://username:password@localhost:5432/hnf1b_db
```

## Frontend Integration

### Authentication
The API uses JWT authentication for data modification. Demo credentials are available for testing:

```javascript
// Login to get JWT token
const response = await axios.post('/api/v2/auth/login', {
  username: 'researcher',  // or 'admin'
  password: 'research123'   // or 'admin123'
});
axios.defaults.headers.common['Authorization'] = `Bearer ${response.data.access_token}`;
```

### HPO Term Search
The API provides HPO term search endpoints for phenotype selection:

```javascript
// Search HPO terms for autocomplete
await axios.get('/api/v2/hpo/autocomplete?q=kidney&limit=10');

// Get common HNF1B-related terms
await axios.get('/api/v2/hpo/common-terms?category=renal');

// Validate HPO term IDs
await axios.get('/api/v2/hpo/validate?term_ids=HP:0012622,HP:0000107');
```

### Creating New Patients
With authentication, you can add new patients using the Phenopackets format:

```javascript
await axios.post('/api/v2/phenopackets/', {
  phenopacket: {
    id: "phenopacket:HNF1B:NEW001",
    subject: { id: "NEW001", sex: "FEMALE" },
    phenotypicFeatures: [
      { type: { id: "HP:0012622", label: "Chronic kidney disease" }}
    ],
    meta_data: {
      created: new Date().toISOString(),
      created_by: "researcher"
    }
  }
});
```

### API Documentation
- Interactive API docs: http://localhost:8000/api/v2/docs
- Phenopackets endpoints: `/api/v2/phenopackets/`
- HPO proxy endpoints: `/api/v2/hpo/`
- Authentication: `/api/v2/auth/`

For detailed migration information, see [PHENOPACKETS_MIGRATION_GUIDE.md](PHENOPACKETS_MIGRATION_GUIDE.md)

Commit message:

docs: update README to reflect phenopackets migration improvements
  - Document PMID/DOI publication reference support
  - Add details about enhanced age parsing capabilities (1y9m → P1Y9M)
  - Document HPO onset term mappings (prenatal → HP:0034199)
  - Update migration output example with actual statistics
  - Clarify features for variant handling and evidence tracking
  - Add publication map creation to typical output

README.md, after:

# HNF1B-API

A FastAPI-based REST API for managing clinical and genetic data for individuals with HNF1B disease.

## Quick Start

**Prerequisites:** Python 3.10+, Docker, uv package manager ([install guide](#1-install-uv-package-manager))

```bash
# 1. Install dependencies
make dev

# 2. Configure environment  
cp .env.example .env
# Edit .env with your database settings

# 3. Start services and database
make hybrid-up      # Start PostgreSQL and Redis containers
make db-upgrade     # Apply database schema

# 4. Start development server
make server

# API available at http://localhost:8000
# Docs at http://localhost:8000/docs
```

## Development Commands

```bash
make help          # Show all available commands
make check         # Run all checks (lint + typecheck + tests)
make test          # Run tests
make format        # Format code with ruff
make lint          # Lint code with ruff
make typecheck     # Type check with mypy
make hybrid-down   # Stop containers
```

## Tech Stack

- **API**: FastAPI with async/await
- **Database**: PostgreSQL with SQLAlchemy
- **Cache**: Redis
- **Auth**: JWT tokens
- **Tools**: uv (dependencies), ruff (linting/formatting), mypy (types)
- **Development**: Docker containers for services

## API Endpoints

### Phenopackets v2 API (Current)
- `/api/v2/phenopackets` - GA4GH Phenopackets CRUD operations
- `/api/v2/clinical` - Clinical feature-specific queries
- `/api/v2/auth` - JWT authentication
- `/api/v2/hpo` - HPO term search and validation
- `/api/v2/docs` - Interactive API documentation

### Legacy Endpoints (Being phased out)
- `/api/individuals` - Patient demographics
- `/api/variants` - Genetic variants
- `/api/publications` - Publication metadata
- `/api/search` - Cross-collection search
- `/api/aggregations` - Data statistics

## Environment Setup

Create `.env` file:
```
DATABASE_URL=postgresql+asyncpg://hnf1b_user:hnf1b_pass@localhost:5433/hnf1b_db
JWT_SECRET=your-secret-key
```

## Data Import

The project includes a direct Google Sheets to GA4GH Phenopackets v2 migration system that imports clinical and genetic data directly into the international standard format.

### Prerequisites

```bash
# 1. Start database services
make hybrid-up     # Start PostgreSQL and Redis containers

# 2. Verify environment
# Ensure .env file exists with valid DATABASE_URL pointing to hnf1b_phenopackets database
```

### Import Commands

```bash
# Full production import (processes all 864 individuals)
make phenopackets-migrate

# Limited test import (processes 20 individuals, faster for development)
make phenopackets-migrate-test

# Dry run - outputs to JSON file without database changes
make phenopackets-migrate-dry

# Alternative: Run directly with Python
uv run python migration/direct_sheets_to_phenopackets.py          # Full import
uv run python migration/direct_sheets_to_phenopackets.py --test   # Test import
uv run python migration/direct_sheets_to_phenopackets.py --dry-run # Dry run
```

### Data Sources

The migration system processes data from multiple sources:

1. **Google Sheets**: Clinical and genetic data from configured spreadsheet
   - Individual demographics and clinical reports
   - Publication metadata with PMID and DOI identifiers
   - Variant classifications with original and standardized nomenclature
   - Temporal data with complex age formats (e.g., "1y9m", "prenatal")

2. **Genomic Files** (in `/data/` directory):
   - `HNF1B_all_small.vcf` - Small genetic variants (182 variants)
   - `HNF1B_all_large.vcf` - Large structural variants (19 variants)  
   - `HNF1B_all_small.vep.txt` - VEP annotations for small variants (303 annotations)
   - `HNF1B_all_large.vep.txt` - VEP annotations for large variants (53,855 annotations)
   - `GRCh38-v1.6_*.tsv.gz` - CADD pathogenicity scores

### Migration System Architecture

The direct migration system is located in `/migration/` directory:

```
migration/
├── direct_sheets_to_phenopackets.py  # Direct Google Sheets to Phenopackets v2 migration
└── (legacy modules - no longer used)
```

### Features

- **Direct conversion**: Google Sheets data directly to GA4GH Phenopackets v2 format
- **Deduplication**: Automatically consolidates multiple rows per individual
- **Test mode**: Processes limited dataset (20 individuals) for faster development
- **Dry run mode**: Outputs to JSON file for inspection without database changes
- **HPO mapping**: Automatic mapping of clinical terms to Human Phenotype Ontology
  - Special onset terms mapped to HPO (prenatal → HP:0034199, congenital → HP:0003577)
- **MONDO diseases**: Proper disease classification using MONDO ontology
- **Variant handling**: Prioritizes Varsome format, falls back to other formats
  - Preserves original notation alongside standardized HGVS nomenclature
- **Age parsing**: Handles complex formats (1y9m → P1Y9M ISO 8601 duration)
- **Publication references**: PMID and DOI identifiers with proper GA4GH ExternalReference format
- **Evidence tracking**: Complete provenance with timestamps and publication attribution

### Import Process

The direct migration:

1. **Loads Google Sheets data**: Fetches clinical and genetic data
2. **Groups by individual**: Consolidates 939 rows into 864 unique individuals
3. **Builds Phenopackets**: Creates GA4GH v2 compliant phenopackets
4. **Maps ontologies**: HPO terms for phenotypes, MONDO for diseases
5. **Stores in database**: Saves as JSONB documents in PostgreSQL

### Typical Output

```
Loading data from Google Sheets...
Loaded 939 rows from individuals sheet
Loaded 160 rows from publications sheet
Created publication map with 320 entries
Processing 864 individuals...
Building phenopackets: 100%|████████████| 864/864 [00:01<00:00, 681.39it/s]
Built 864 phenopackets
Storing phenopackets: 100%|████████████| 864/864 [00:02<00:00, 327.69it/s]
Successfully stored 864 phenopackets

============================================================
MIGRATION SUMMARY
============================================================
Total phenopackets created: 864
With phenotypic features: 830 (96%)
With genetic variants: 864 (100%)
With disease diagnoses: 864 (100%)
Sex distribution: {'UNKNOWN_SEX': 187, 'FEMALE': 329, 'MALE': 348}
============================================================
```

## Installation & Setup

### Prerequisites

- **Python 3.10+** (required for modern type hints)
- **Docker & Docker Compose** (for PostgreSQL/Redis services)
- **uv package manager** (for dependency management)

### 1. Install uv Package Manager

**macOS/Linux:**
```bash
curl -LsSf https://astral.sh/uv/install.sh | sh
```

**Windows:**
```bash
powershell -c "irm https://astral.sh/uv/install.ps1 | iex"
```

**Alternative (with pip):**
```bash
pip install uv
```

### 2. Clone and Setup Project

```bash
# Clone repository
git clone <repository-url>
cd hnf1b-api

# Install all dependencies (including dev and test groups)
make dev
# OR manually:
uv sync --group dev --group test

# Create environment file
cp .env.example .env
# Edit .env with your settings (see Environment Configuration below)
```

### 3. Environment Configuration

Create/edit `.env` file with required variables:

```bash
# PostgreSQL Database (matches docker-compose.services.yml)
DATABASE_URL=postgresql+asyncpg://hnf1b_user:hnf1b_pass@localhost:5433/hnf1b_db

# JWT Authentication
JWT_SECRET=your-secret-key-change-this-in-production

# Development Settings
DEBUG=true
```

### 4. Start Services & Database

```bash
# Start PostgreSQL and Redis containers
make hybrid-up

# Apply database schema
make db-upgrade

# Verify services are running
docker ps
```

### 5. Run the Application

```bash
# Start development server
make server

# API will be available at:
# - http://localhost:8000 (API)  
# - http://localhost:8000/docs (API documentation)
```

## Alternative Installation (without uv)

If you prefer using pip/virtualenv:

```bash
# Create virtual environment
python -m venv .venv

# Activate (Linux/macOS)
source .venv/bin/activate
# Activate (Windows)  
.venv\Scripts\activate

# Install dependencies
pip install -r requirements-dev.txt  # Includes dev and test dependencies

# Follow steps 3-5 above, but replace 'make' commands:
python -m uvicorn app.main:app --reload  # instead of 'make server'
python migration/direct_sheets_to_phenopackets.py --test  # instead of 'make phenopackets-migrate-test'
```

### Dependency Files Available

- `requirements.txt` - Core runtime dependencies only
- `requirements-dev.txt` - All dependencies including dev tools and tests
- `pyproject.toml` - Modern Python project configuration (preferred with uv)

## Troubleshooting

### uv Issues
- **"uv not found"**: Ensure uv is in your PATH, restart terminal
- **Permission errors**: On Linux/macOS, ensure `~/.local/bin` is in PATH
- **Python version**: uv requires Python 3.8+, project needs 3.10+

### Database Issues  
- **Connection refused**: Ensure `make hybrid-up` completed successfully
- **Schema errors**: Run `make db-upgrade` to apply migrations
- **Port conflicts**: Check if port 5433 is available (`lsof -i :5433`)

### Docker Issues
- **Services won't start**: Check Docker is running and ports 5433, 6379 available
- **Permission errors**: Ensure user is in docker group (Linux)

### Alternative Database Setup
If Docker isn't available, install PostgreSQL locally:

```bash
# Update DATABASE_URL in .env to match your local setup
DATABASE_URL=postgresql+asyncpg://username:password@localhost:5432/hnf1b_db
```

## Frontend Integration

### Authentication
The API uses JWT authentication for data modification. Demo credentials are available for testing:

```javascript
// Login to get JWT token
const response = await axios.post('/api/v2/auth/login', {
  username: 'researcher',  // or 'admin'
  password: 'research123'   // or 'admin123'
});
axios.defaults.headers.common['Authorization'] = `Bearer ${response.data.access_token}`;
```

### HPO Term Search
The API provides HPO term search endpoints for phenotype selection:

```javascript
// Search HPO terms for autocomplete
await axios.get('/api/v2/hpo/autocomplete?q=kidney&limit=10');

// Get common HNF1B-related terms
await axios.get('/api/v2/hpo/common-terms?category=renal');

// Validate HPO term IDs
await axios.get('/api/v2/hpo/validate?term_ids=HP:0012622,HP:0000107');
```

### Creating New Patients
With authentication, you can add new patients using the Phenopackets format:

```javascript
await axios.post('/api/v2/phenopackets/', {
  phenopacket: {
    id: "phenopacket:HNF1B:NEW001",
    subject: { id: "NEW001", sex: "FEMALE" },
    phenotypicFeatures: [
      { type: { id: "HP:0012622", label: "Chronic kidney disease" }}
    ],
    meta_data: {
      created: new Date().toISOString(),
      created_by: "researcher"
    }
  }
});
```

### API Documentation
- Interactive API docs: http://localhost:8000/api/v2/docs
- Phenopackets endpoints: `/api/v2/phenopackets/`
- HPO proxy endpoints: `/api/v2/hpo/`
- Authentication: `/api/v2/auth/`

For detailed migration information, see [PHENOPACKETS_MIGRATION_GUIDE.md](PHENOPACKETS_MIGRATION_GUIDE.md)
