frontend/src/components/gene/README.md, before:

# HNF1B Gene and Protein Visualizations

This directory contains interactive SVG-based visualizations for displaying HNF1B variants in both genomic and protein contexts.

## Components

### 1. HNF1BGeneVisualization.vue

**Purpose:** Displays variants mapped to the HNF1B gene structure on chromosome 17.

**Features:**
- **Exon structure**: Shows all 9 exons with accurate genomic coordinates (GRCh38)
- **Intron backbone**: Connects exons with a horizontal line representing the gene span
- **SNV markers**: Point mutations displayed as colored circles above the gene
- **CNV tracks**: Large deletions/duplications shown as colored bars below the gene
- **Domain highlighting**: Exons colored by functional domain (POU-S, POU-H, Transactivation)
- **Interactive tooltips**: Hover to see exon details or variant information
- **Exon-level zoom**: Click any exon to zoom in for detailed variant positioning within that exon
- **Zoom controls**: Zoom in/out/reset for detailed inspection (also resets exon zoom)
- **Current variant highlighting**: Purple border highlights the currently viewed variant

**Visual Layout:**
```
┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│         HNF1B Gene (chr17:37.69-37.75 Mb) - 58.6 kb         │
├─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┤
│   ⬤       ⬤⬤            ⬤        ⬤                        │ <- SNV markers
│   │       ││            │        │                         │
│ ╔═╗ ╔═╗ ╔═══╗ ╔═══╗ ╔══╗ ╔═╗ ╔═══╗ ╔═══╗ ╔═════╗         │
│ ━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━   │
│         ▓▓▓▓▓▓▓▓▓▓▓▓▓▓▓▓░░░░░░░░░░░                       │ <- CNV deletion
│                                                             │
│ E1  E2  E3   E4   E5  E6  E7   E8    E9                    │
└─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘
```

**Props:**
- `variants` (Array): Array of variant objects with genomic positions
- `currentVariantId` (String): ID of the variant being viewed (highlighted in purple)

**Events:**
- `variant-clicked`: Emitted when user clicks on a variant marker (payload: variant object)

**Data Requirements:**
Variants must have:
- `variant_id`: Unique identifier
- `hg38`: Genomic coordinate in format:
  - SNVs: `chr17-36098063-C-T`
  - CNVs: `17:36459258-37832869:DEL`
- `classificationVerdict`: Pathogenicity classification
- `simple_id`: Display label
- `transcript`, `protein`: HGVS notations (optional)

### 2. HNF1BProteinVisualization.vue

**Purpose:** Displays variants mapped to the HNF1B protein structure (557 amino acids).

**Features:**
- **Domain architecture**: Shows 4 functional domains with accurate amino acid positions
  - Dimerization Domain (aa 1-32) - Orange
  - POU-Specific Domain (aa 101-157) - Blue
  - POU Homeodomain (aa 183-243) - Cyan
  - Transactivation Domain (aa 400-557) - Green
- **Lollipop plot**: SNVs displayed as circles on stems above the protein backbone
- **Stacking**: Multiple variants at the same position are stacked vertically
- **Frequency encoding**: Stem height indicates number of individuals with variant
- **Pathogenicity colors**: Circle colors indicate clinical significance
- **Functional sites**: Gold stars mark key DNA-binding residues
- **CNV alert**: Informs user that CNVs are not shown (use Gene View instead)
- **Interactive tooltips**: Hover for variant details including amino acid position
- **Zoom controls**: Zoom in/out/reset for detailed inspection

**Visual Layout:**
```
┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│              HNF1B Protein Domains (557 aa)                 │
├─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┤
│   ⬤  ⬤   ⬤⬤    ⬤     ⬤⬤⬤                                  │ <- Lollipops
│   │  │   ││    │     │││                                   │
│   │  │   ││    │     │││                                   │
│ ╔═╗ ░░░ ╔═══╗ ░░ ╔═══╗ ░░░░░░░░░░░░░░░░░ ╔══════════╗    │
│ Dim     POU-S    POU-H                    Transactivation  │
│                                                             │
│ 1   32  101  157 183  243              400            557  │
└─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘
```

**Props:**
- `variants` (Array): Array of variant objects with protein positions
- `currentVariantId` (String): ID of the variant being viewed (highlighted in purple)

**Events:**
- `variant-clicked`: Emitted when user clicks on a variant marker (payload: variant object)

**Data Requirements:**
Variants must have:
- `variant_id`: Unique identifier
- `protein`: HGVS protein notation (e.g., `NP_000449.3:p.Arg177Ter`)
- `classificationVerdict`: Pathogenicity classification
- `simple_id`: Display label
- `transcript`: HGVS transcript notation (optional, for tooltip)
- `individualCount`: Number of individuals with variant (optional)

**Amino Acid Position Extraction:**
The component parses amino acid positions from HGVS p. notation:
- `p.Arg177Ter` → position 177
- `p.Ser546Phe` → position 546
- `p.Met1?` → position 1

## Usage

### Exon Zoom Feature

**How to use:**
1. **Click any exon** in the gene visualization to zoom into that specific exon
2. The view will **automatically adjust** to show:
   - The selected exon (highlighted with orange border and pulsing animation)
   - ±200bp padding on each side for context
   - Any variants within that exon region
3. **Coordinate labels update** to show the zoomed region
4. **Status indicator** appears: "Zoomed to Exon X (Y bp) - Click exon again or Reset to zoom out"
5. **To zoom out**: Click the same exon again OR click the "Reset" button

**Example use case:**
```
Scenario: You have a variant at chr17:37,744,550 in Exon 1
Problem: The full gene view (58.6 kb) makes it hard to see exact position within the 519bp exon

Solution:
1. Click on Exon 1 (the blue rectangle)
2. View zooms to chr17:37,744,340-37,745,259 (showing ~919bp total)
3. The variant marker is now prominently visible within the exon
4. You can see exactly where in the exon the variant falls
```

**Visual indicators:**
- **Orange border (4px)**: Currently zoomed exon
- **Pulsing animation**: Orange glow effect on zoomed exon
- **Cursor changes**: Pointer cursor on all exons (indicates clickable)
- **Tooltip hint**: "Click to zoom to this exon" when hovering

### In PageVariant.vue

```vue
<template>
  <!-- Tabbed interface with both views -->
  <v-tabs v-model="visualizationTab">
    <v-tab value="gene">Gene View</v-tab>
    <v-tab value="protein">Protein View</v-tab>
  </v-tabs>

  <v-window v-model="visualizationTab">
    <v-window-item value="gene">
      <HNF1BGeneVisualization
        :variants="allVariants"
        :current-variant-id="$route.params.variant_id"
        @variant-clicked="navigateToVariant"
      />
    </v-window-item>
    <v-window-item value="protein">
      <HNF1BProteinVisualization
        :variants="allVariants"
        :current-variant-id="$route.params.variant_id"
        @variant-clicked="navigateToVariant"
      />
    </v-window-item>
  </v-window>
</template>

<script>
import HNF1BGeneVisualization from '@/components/gene/HNF1BGeneVisualization.vue';
import HNF1BProteinVisualization from '@/components/gene/HNF1BProteinVisualization.vue';

export default {
  components: {
    HNF1BGeneVisualization,
    HNF1BProteinVisualization,
  },
  data() {
    return {
      allVariants: [],
      visualizationTab: 'gene', // Default view
    };
  },
  async created() {
    await this.loadAllVariants();
  },
  methods: {
    async loadAllVariants() {
      const response = await getVariants({ page: 1, page_size: 1000 });
      this.allVariants = response.data || [];
    },
    navigateToVariant(variant) {
      this.$router.push(`/variants/${variant.variant_id}`);
    },
  },
};
</script>
```

## Color Coding

### Pathogenicity Colors
- **Red** (`#EF5350`): Pathogenic
- **Orange** (`#FF9800`): Likely Pathogenic
- **Yellow** (`#FFEB3B`): Uncertain Significance (VUS)
- **Light Green** (`#9CCC65`): Likely Benign
- **Green** (`#66BB6A`): Benign
- **Grey** (`#BDBDBD`): Unknown/Not classified

### Domain Colors (Gene View)
- **Blue** (`#42A5F5`): POU domains (DNA binding)
- **Green** (`#66BB6A`): Transactivation domain
- **Grey** (`#BDBDBD`): UTR regions
- **Default Blue** (`#1E88E5`): Other exons

### Domain Colors (Protein View)
- **Orange** (`#FFB74D`): Dimerization Domain
- **Blue** (`#64B5F6`): POU-Specific Domain
- **Cyan** (`#4FC3F7`): POU Homeodomain
- **Green** (`#81C784`): Transactivation Domain

### CNV Colors
- **Red** (`#EF5350`): Deletions
- **Blue** (`#42A5F5`): Duplications

## Performance

### Rendering
- **Gene View**: ~50ms for 100 variants
- **Protein View**: ~50ms for 100 variants
- **Zoom/Pan**: ~10ms (SVG transforms only)
- **Tooltips**: Instant (<5ms)

### Memory
- **SVG DOM**: ~1KB per variant
- **100 variants**: ~100KB memory footprint
- **Responsive**: Adapts to container width

## Browser Compatibility

- **Chrome/Edge**: Full support (recommended)
- **Firefox**: Full support
- **Safari**: Full support
- **Mobile**: Responsive design with touch support

## Accessibility

- **Keyboard navigation**: Tab through interactive elements
- **Screen readers**: ARIA labels on SVG elements
- **High contrast**: Color choices meet WCAG AA standards
- **Zoom support**: Browser zoom works correctly

## Future Enhancements

### Potential Features
- [ ] Conservation score heatmap overlay
- [ ] Transcript isoform selector (if multiple isoforms exist)
- [ ] Variant frequency bar charts
- [ ] Population data integration (gnomAD)
- [ ] Export as SVG/PNG
- [ ] Variant clustering analysis
- [ ] 3D protein structure integration
- [ ] Pathway interaction overlay

### Performance Optimizations
- [ ] Virtual scrolling for 1000+ variants
- [ ] WebGL rendering for massive datasets
- [ ] Canvas fallback for older browsers
- [ ] Lazy loading of variant details

## Troubleshooting

### Issue: Variants not appearing

**Possible causes:**
1. Missing genomic coordinates (`hg38` field)
2. Missing protein notation (`protein` field)
3. Invalid coordinate format

**Solution:**
Check variant data structure:
```javascript
console.log(variants[0]);
// Should have: variant_id, hg38 (gene view), protein (protein view)
```

### Issue: Tooltips not showing

**Possible causes:**
1. Z-index conflict with other components
2. Pointer events disabled

**Solution:**
Ensure tooltip container has high z-index:
```css
.custom-tooltip {
  z-index: 9999;
  pointer-events: none;
}
```

### Issue: Visualizations not responsive

**Possible causes:**
1. Fixed width container
2. Window resize listener not working

**Solution:**
Ensure parent container has width: 100%:
```css
.svg-container {
  width: 100%;
  overflow-x: auto;
}
```

## References

### HNF1B Gene
- **HGNC ID**: HGNC:5024
- **Chromosome**: 17q12
- **Coordinates (GRCh38)**: chr17:37,686,430-37,745,059
- **Transcript**: NM_000458.4 (MANE Select)
- **Protein**: NP_000449.3 (557 amino acids)
- **Gene size**: 58.6 kb
- **Exons**: 9 coding exons
- **Strand**: Minus (reverse complement)

### External Resources
- [UCSC Genome Browser](https://genome.ucsc.edu/cgi-bin/hgTracks?db=hg38&position=chr17%3A37686430-37745059)
- [Ensembl](https://www.ensembl.org/Homo_sapiens/Gene/Summary?g=ENSG00000108753)
- [UniProt](https://www.uniprot.org/uniprotkb/P35680/entry)
- [ClinVar](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/clinvar/?term=HNF1B[gene])

## Contributing

When modifying these components:

1. **Maintain coordinate accuracy**: Use exact GRCh38 coordinates
2. **Preserve color scheme**: Follow established pathogenicity colors
3. **Test with real data**: Use actual variant data, not mock data
4. **Update documentation**: Keep this README in sync with changes
5. **Run linting**: `npm run lint` before committing
6. **Test responsiveness**: Verify on mobile and desktop

## License

Part of the HNF1B Database project. See main project LICENSE.

Commit message:

docs(frontend): add note about excluded DNA binding sites in README (#65)
  - Add clarification note to protein visualization features section
  - Document intentional exclusion of functional DNA-binding site markers
  - Explain rationale: inability to verify accuracy against authoritative
    protein structure references

  Ensures users understand this was a deliberate engineering decision
  prioritizing clinical accuracy over visual completeness, not an
  oversight or incomplete implementation.

  Modified: frontend/src/components/gene/README.md (+2 lines, -1 line)

frontend/src/components/gene/README.md, after:

# HNF1B Gene and Protein Visualizations

This directory contains interactive SVG-based visualizations for displaying HNF1B variants in both genomic and protein contexts.

## Components

### 1. HNF1BGeneVisualization.vue

**Purpose:** Displays variants mapped to the HNF1B gene structure on chromosome 17.

**Features:**
- **Exon structure**: Shows all 9 exons with accurate genomic coordinates (GRCh38)
- **Intron backbone**: Connects exons with a horizontal line representing the gene span
- **SNV markers**: Point mutations displayed as colored circles above the gene
- **CNV tracks**: Large deletions/duplications shown as colored bars below the gene
- **Domain highlighting**: Exons colored by functional domain (POU-S, POU-H, Transactivation)
- **Interactive tooltips**: Hover to see exon details or variant information
- **Exon-level zoom**: Click any exon to zoom in for detailed variant positioning within that exon
- **Zoom controls**: Zoom in/out/reset for detailed inspection (also resets exon zoom)
- **Current variant highlighting**: Purple border highlights the currently viewed variant

**Visual Layout:**
```
┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│         HNF1B Gene (chr17:37.69-37.75 Mb) - 58.6 kb         │
├─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┤
│   ⬤       ⬤⬤            ⬤        ⬤                        │ <- SNV markers
│   │       ││            │        │                         │
│ ╔═╗ ╔═╗ ╔═══╗ ╔═══╗ ╔══╗ ╔═╗ ╔═══╗ ╔═══╗ ╔═════╗         │
│ ━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━━   │
│         ▓▓▓▓▓▓▓▓▓▓▓▓▓▓▓▓░░░░░░░░░░░                       │ <- CNV deletion
│                                                             │
│ E1  E2  E3   E4   E5  E6  E7   E8    E9                    │
└─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘
```

**Props:**
- `variants` (Array): Array of variant objects with genomic positions
- `currentVariantId` (String): ID of the variant being viewed (highlighted in purple)

**Events:**
- `variant-clicked`: Emitted when user clicks on a variant marker (payload: variant object)

**Data Requirements:**
Variants must have:
- `variant_id`: Unique identifier
- `hg38`: Genomic coordinate in format:
  - SNVs: `chr17-36098063-C-T`
  - CNVs: `17:36459258-37832869:DEL`
- `classificationVerdict`: Pathogenicity classification
- `simple_id`: Display label
- `transcript`, `protein`: HGVS notations (optional)

### 2. HNF1BProteinVisualization.vue

**Purpose:** Displays variants mapped to the HNF1B protein structure (557 amino acids).

**Features:**
- **Domain architecture**: Shows 4 functional domains with accurate amino acid positions
  - Dimerization Domain (aa 1-32) - Orange
  - POU-Specific Domain (aa 101-157) - Blue
  - POU Homeodomain (aa 183-243) - Cyan
  - Transactivation Domain (aa 400-557) - Green
- **Lollipop plot**: SNVs displayed as circles on stems above the protein backbone
- **Stacking**: Multiple variants at the same position are stacked vertically
- **Frequency encoding**: Stem height indicates number of individuals with variant
- **Pathogenicity colors**: Circle colors indicate clinical significance
- **CNV alert**: Informs user that CNVs are not shown (use Gene View instead)
- **Interactive tooltips**: Hover for variant details including amino acid position
- **Zoom controls**: Zoom in/out/reset for detailed inspection

**Note:** Functional DNA-binding site markers were intentionally excluded from this visualization due to inability to verify accuracy against authoritative protein structure references.

**Visual Layout:**
```
┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│              HNF1B Protein Domains (557 aa)                 │
├─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┤
│   ⬤  ⬤   ⬤⬤    ⬤     ⬤⬤⬤                                  │ <- Lollipops
│   │  │   ││    │     │││                                   │
│   │  │   ││    │     │││                                   │
│ ╔═╗ ░░░ ╔═══╗ ░░ ╔═══╗ ░░░░░░░░░░░░░░░░░ ╔══════════╗    │
│ Dim     POU-S    POU-H                    Transactivation  │
│                                                             │
│ 1   32  101  157 183  243              400            557  │
└─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘
```

**Props:**
- `variants` (Array): Array of variant objects with protein positions
- `currentVariantId` (String): ID of the variant being viewed (highlighted in purple)

**Events:**
- `variant-clicked`: Emitted when user clicks on a variant marker (payload: variant object)

**Data Requirements:**
Variants must have:
- `variant_id`: Unique identifier
- `protein`: HGVS protein notation (e.g., `NP_000449.3:p.Arg177Ter`)
- `classificationVerdict`: Pathogenicity classification
- `simple_id`: Display label
- `transcript`: HGVS transcript notation (optional, for tooltip)
- `individualCount`: Number of individuals with variant (optional)

**Amino Acid Position Extraction:**
The component parses amino acid positions from HGVS p. notation:
- `p.Arg177Ter` → position 177
- `p.Ser546Phe` → position 546
- `p.Met1?` → position 1

## Usage

### Exon Zoom Feature

**How to use:**
1. **Click any exon** in the gene visualization to zoom into that specific exon
2. The view will **automatically adjust** to show:
   - The selected exon (highlighted with orange border and pulsing animation)
   - ±200bp padding on each side for context
   - Any variants within that exon region
3. **Coordinate labels update** to show the zoomed region
4. **Status indicator** appears: "Zoomed to Exon X (Y bp) - Click exon again or Reset to zoom out"
5. **To zoom out**: Click the same exon again OR click the "Reset" button

**Example use case:**
```
Scenario: You have a variant at chr17:37,744,550 in Exon 1
Problem: The full gene view (58.6 kb) makes it hard to see exact position within the 519bp exon

Solution:
1. Click on Exon 1 (the blue rectangle)
2. View zooms to chr17:37,744,340-37,745,259 (showing ~919bp total)
3. The variant marker is now prominently visible within the exon
4. You can see exactly where in the exon the variant falls
```

**Visual indicators:**
- **Orange border (4px)**: Currently zoomed exon
- **Pulsing animation**: Orange glow effect on zoomed exon
- **Cursor changes**: Pointer cursor on all exons (indicates clickable)
- **Tooltip hint**: "Click to zoom to this exon" when hovering

### In PageVariant.vue

```vue
<template>
  <!-- Tabbed interface with both views -->
  <v-tabs v-model="visualizationTab">
    <v-tab value="gene">Gene View</v-tab>
    <v-tab value="protein">Protein View</v-tab>
  </v-tabs>

  <v-window v-model="visualizationTab">
    <v-window-item value="gene">
      <HNF1BGeneVisualization
        :variants="allVariants"
        :current-variant-id="$route.params.variant_id"
        @variant-clicked="navigateToVariant"
      />
    </v-window-item>
    <v-window-item value="protein">
      <HNF1BProteinVisualization
        :variants="allVariants"
        :current-variant-id="$route.params.variant_id"
        @variant-clicked="navigateToVariant"
      />
    </v-window-item>
  </v-window>
</template>

<script>
import HNF1BGeneVisualization from '@/components/gene/HNF1BGeneVisualization.vue';
import HNF1BProteinVisualization from '@/components/gene/HNF1BProteinVisualization.vue';

export default {
  components: {
    HNF1BGeneVisualization,
    HNF1BProteinVisualization,
  },
  data() {
    return {
      allVariants: [],
      visualizationTab: 'gene', // Default view
    };
  },
  async created() {
    await this.loadAllVariants();
  },
  methods: {
    async loadAllVariants() {
      const response = await getVariants({ page: 1, page_size: 1000 });
      this.allVariants = response.data || [];
    },
    navigateToVariant(variant) {
      this.$router.push(`/variants/${variant.variant_id}`);
    },
  },
};
</script>
```

## Color Coding

### Pathogenicity Colors
- **Red** (`#EF5350`): Pathogenic
- **Orange** (`#FF9800`): Likely Pathogenic
- **Yellow** (`#FFEB3B`): Uncertain Significance (VUS)
- **Light Green** (`#9CCC65`): Likely Benign
- **Green** (`#66BB6A`): Benign
- **Grey** (`#BDBDBD`): Unknown/Not classified

### Domain Colors (Gene View)
- **Blue** (`#42A5F5`): POU domains (DNA binding)
- **Green** (`#66BB6A`): Transactivation domain
- **Grey** (`#BDBDBD`): UTR regions
- **Default Blue** (`#1E88E5`): Other exons

### Domain Colors (Protein View)
- **Orange** (`#FFB74D`): Dimerization Domain
- **Blue** (`#64B5F6`): POU-Specific Domain
- **Cyan** (`#4FC3F7`): POU Homeodomain
- **Green** (`#81C784`): Transactivation Domain

### CNV Colors
- **Red** (`#EF5350`): Deletions
- **Blue** (`#42A5F5`): Duplications

## Performance

### Rendering
- **Gene View**: ~50ms for 100 variants
- **Protein View**: ~50ms for 100 variants
- **Zoom/Pan**: ~10ms (SVG transforms only)
- **Tooltips**: Instant (<5ms)

### Memory
- **SVG DOM**: ~1KB per variant
- **100 variants**: ~100KB memory footprint
- **Responsive**: Adapts to container width

## Browser Compatibility

- **Chrome/Edge**: Full support (recommended)
- **Firefox**: Full support
- **Safari**: Full support
- **Mobile**: Responsive design with touch support

## Accessibility

- **Keyboard navigation**: Tab through interactive elements
- **Screen readers**: ARIA labels on SVG elements
- **High contrast**: Color choices meet WCAG AA standards
- **Zoom support**: Browser zoom works correctly

## Future Enhancements

### Potential Features
- [ ] Conservation score heatmap overlay
- [ ] Transcript isoform selector (if multiple isoforms exist)
- [ ] Variant frequency bar charts
- [ ] Population data integration (gnomAD)
- [ ] Export as SVG/PNG
- [ ] Variant clustering analysis
- [ ] 3D protein structure integration
- [ ] Pathway interaction overlay

### Performance Optimizations
- [ ] Virtual scrolling for 1000+ variants
- [ ] WebGL rendering for massive datasets
- [ ] Canvas fallback for older browsers
- [ ] Lazy loading of variant details

## Troubleshooting

### Issue: Variants not appearing

**Possible causes:**
1. Missing genomic coordinates (`hg38` field)
2. Missing protein notation (`protein` field)
3. Invalid coordinate format

**Solution:**
Check variant data structure:
```javascript
console.log(variants[0]);
// Should have: variant_id, hg38 (gene view), protein (protein view)
```

### Issue: Tooltips not showing

**Possible causes:**
1. Z-index conflict with other components
2. Pointer events disabled

**Solution:**
Ensure tooltip container has high z-index:
```css
.custom-tooltip {
  z-index: 9999;
  pointer-events: none;
}
```

### Issue: Visualizations not responsive

**Possible causes:**
1. Fixed width container
2. Window resize listener not working

**Solution:**
Ensure parent container has width: 100%:
```css
.svg-container {
  width: 100%;
  overflow-x: auto;
}
```

## References

### HNF1B Gene
- **HGNC ID**: HGNC:5024
- **Chromosome**: 17q12
- **Coordinates (GRCh38)**: chr17:37,686,430-37,745,059
- **Transcript**: NM_000458.4 (MANE Select)
- **Protein**: NP_000449.3 (557 amino acids)
- **Gene size**: 58.6 kb
- **Exons**: 9 coding exons
- **Strand**: Minus (reverse complement)

### External Resources
- [UCSC Genome Browser](https://genome.ucsc.edu/cgi-bin/hgTracks?db=hg38&position=chr17%3A37686430-37745059)
- [Ensembl](https://www.ensembl.org/Homo_sapiens/Gene/Summary?g=ENSG00000108753)
- [UniProt](https://www.uniprot.org/uniprotkb/P35680/entry)
- [ClinVar](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/clinvar/?term=HNF1B[gene])

## Contributing

When modifying these components:

1. **Maintain coordinate accuracy**: Use exact GRCh38 coordinates
2. **Preserve color scheme**: Follow established pathogenicity colors
3. **Test with real data**: Use actual variant data, not mock data
4. **Update documentation**: Keep this README in sync with changes
5. **Run linting**: `npm run lint` before committing
6. **Test responsiveness**: Verify on mobile and desktop

## License

Part of the HNF1B Database project. See main project LICENSE.
